hi everyone Laszlo Montgomery here once
again with another China history podcast
episode the fifth in a series where I've
tried to cobble down a nice little handy
Greatest Hits anthology from the history
of China and Vietnam relations before we
pick up where we left off last episode
in the Ming Dynasty later lay down in
dive yet I wanted to mention a couple
things don't be fooled by the term
Vietnam used throughout my narrative I'm
saying Vietnam merely out of convenience
now that I do Vietnam scholars would
ever dare stoop to listen to your humble
narrators amateur efforts to wander into
their territory but I'm sure there's a
collective cringe whenever I mention
this ancient land by its modern name of
Vietnam that comes later for now as we
get closer to modern times in Vietnam
and in China the nationalism really
takes on a life of its own with such a
competitive relationship as it was China
and Vietnam the most convenient and
self-satisfying way to write the
historical narratives to cut it down to
the nub and present it as 2,000 years of
Viet resistance to Chinese aggression
and attempts at occupation it's so easy
to say it all came down to that but like
a lot of history it was slightly more
complicated right alongside all this
China Vietnam history from child were
too late height though that we looked at
so far there was this whole other thing
called Vietnam history also going on and
most of it had nothing to do with China
and everything to do with domestic
politics and Vietnam surrounding friends
and foes Southeast Asia China via
relations and everything that came out
of it was merely something woven into
the fabric of a much bigger history a
bigger history that I'm not wandering
too deep into there was more to our
story than on young vom the high bottom
Lee nom de
O'Quinn and lay taiko but you gotta walk
before you run so by introducing all
these great heroes and villains from
this history please keep in mind they're
just part of the story there's more to
it than all these marquee names I'm
throwing at you left and right
check the references on my web page for
the best general history books you could
ever hope for on the subject of Vietnam
I'll mention them later okay we're into
the later laid ina ste down in Vietnam
founded 1428 by lai lai lai typo was his
temple name one of the greatest of the
greatest in Vietnam history firstly he
led the resistance they put an end to
the Ming Dynasty occupation of die Viet
and then not wanting any further trouble
lai lai made a most sincere and humble
piece with the Ming shin the Emperor
that patched things up and gave the lay
ruler some time to consolidate their
victory it was anything but peaceful
though once lay Lloyd passed at 14:30
three opposing factions at the die Viet
court tried to fill that power vacuum
left by the dynasty founder by 1460
however most that had been worked out
when along came the next big name in
Vietnam history this was Lalo's grandson
known as lay pan tong li Shang Tsung he
ruled for a long time 1462 1497 among
many other things he carried the ball
further along consolidating reforms
initiated by his grandfather and
remember how militarily die Viet was
able to acquire and effectively use all
these new gunpowder based weapons
technologies while Champa to the south
of dive yet they hadn't acquired these
technologies and they saw with
trepidation what was happening with
their northern rival the Chapa royal
court after understandably developing
sufficient enough paranoia ran to the
Ming Emperor for protection against this
potentially dangerous
highly fortified neighbor to the north
all these years Champa had been an
on-again off-again military threat to
dive yet times had changed with mild to
lukewarm support coming from Ming China
the kingdom of Champa launched a Hail
Mary and went to war with Lai Dynasty
dive yet very quickly in 1470 they were
soundly defeated and I could promise you
from here on out he won't hear me talk
about any threats to dive yet from
Champa Lai pantone personally led this
fight against the chimes it was a total
mismatch from the get-go the Champa army
I brought a knife to a gunfight wasn't
even close it was over quickly the king
of Champa tried to sue for peace and
strike some sort of bargain but late
pantone was looking to acquire some more
property so he wasn't willing to discuss
any deals the kingdom of Champa was
taken wrecked and the whole royal family
suffered a similar fate to that of
northern Song Emperor Wade zone at the
hands of the Jurchens over 300 years
before Champa was thereby annexed and
became the newest province of dive yet
that was their Louisiana Purchase only
they didn't purchase it there still
remained a smaller rump version of
Champa on the far south but for the most
part they're sad and tragic and began
here by 1490 the population of dive yet
was nearing 4.4 million the Red River
Delta was easily the most densely
inhabited region in all of Southeast
Asia
Lalo's reforms had already turned
Vietnam into a mini China politically
and in the way institutions were set up
and administered as well as how they
organized their military lay panthan
further consolidated these systems and
was a noteworthy sponsor of Confucianism
the later laid I know ste was a very
golden time for the whole ruse school
and Confucian thought and traditions
took hold and Viet society like never
before and like nowhere else in
Southeast Asia by late on Tom's time the
1470s the later lay was firing on all
cylinders it was becoming quite a force
to reckon with these earlier reforms had
taken hold and were bearing fruit it was
just like you had with it she in the
state beginning under Duke show when he
laid the foundation for everything that
was to follow including the achievements
of Qin Shihuang relations with China
were quiet during this period not that
China didn't matter anymore but right
about here so much starts to happen in
both places the bilateral relationship
had moved far beyond what it had
traditionally always been going back to
child to all and then on you at Kingdom
following late anthem and into the 16th
century things began to take a turn for
the worse and dive yet at the dawn of
the 16th century the early glory of the
laid eyeness tea began to slide a new
power at court began to vie for control
this figure who rose to the fore during
this messy period of betrayal
decline and murder in the div' at
imperial court was a powerful military
figure named mukbang young morton young
in mandarin he was perfectly placed when
the power struggle between all the
various court factions got out of
control and degraded into a civil war
from 1518 to 1521 the military victories
over these rebels by mcdaniel helped
keep everything together for the late
honesty the lay emperor had fallen into
the hands of the powerful gym and wind
families who were lined up against the
forces of mcdaniel the jin and wind
clans well we mentioned them last
episode in passing they were early
supporters of lai lai and were
instrumental in bringing him to power
and establishing the later laid ina
state between 15 22 15 27 civil war
raged and died yet and this powerful
force in the military with plenty of
political aspirations mcdaniel in the
end he was the one who emerged
victorious and he ordered the lay
Emperor
leading figures from the gin and Moon
families killed and then set himself up
as the Emperor of his own ruling house
the mock this was not a stable period
and from day one McDaniel was regarded
by his opponents as a usurper another
Wang minh the Jin and when families
retreated regrouped and began to plan a
comeback for their team the ruler of the
ladyness tea as we've seen time and
again when the rulers in and around the
present-day location of Hanoi needed a
helping hand in their corner preferably
with a big powerful army it was always
to China they went in there plotting
about how to rid themselves of McDaniel
these Nobles sent the call north the
cha-ching emperor in China to enlist his
support and the restoration of the
deposed lay Emperor now the divided ming
court mulled this over they didn't speak
with one voice one faction said Dai via
was always part of China we should go in
and restore the lay and reap the
benefits but there were other factions
who said those dive yet people were not
Chinese they were different and
troublesome and we should just leave
them be and just learn how to live next
door to them in peace the mock dynasty
served as a kind of line of demarcation
between the laid ina ste as they would
have liked to have been remembered and
the laid ina ste how they actually ended
up their fate didn't stray that far from
what happened during the last decades of
the Eastern Han in China the Trin's and
then wins never let up in their attempts
to get rid of McDaniel they were able to
seize back some lands in the Red River
Delta but they they couldn't dislodge
him from the capital that gen and winds
however in 1540 were ultimately
successful in their appeals to the Ming
cha-ching Emperor to sense a military
support so a hundred and ten thousand
Chinese troops were sent to the Guang XI
Vietnam border and these Chinese troops
carry the following threatening message
from the ming emperor that all would be
forgotten quote it's the mock regretting
their crime abandon their imperial title
reform their hierarchy and come to the
frontier with long cords around their
necks leading their officers and their
people and to await with submission the
decision from china end quote
that referenced the cords around their
necks that referred to the cords used by
the by europe who submitted to the might
of the qin dynasty back in the third
century BCE the mock took stock of their
situation and let me quote the letter
mcdaniel is said to have written to the
jajang Emperor I lifted these quotes
from the Yale professor Ben Kiernan's
excellent excellent monograph on vietnam
history quote should your gaze
illuminate my sincerity and forgive my
transgression I will be able to start
anew the land and the people all belong
to the heavenly Court in the past I
already gave you a true accounting
presented maps and awaited your verdict
I only longed for heavenly generosity
day and night the way grain longs for
spring rains how can there be anything
else to say
and quote what he really laid it on
thick there and to demonstrate that this
was no idle talk the ming history
recorded that quote a few months later
mcdaniel led a number of ministers to
the border on foot and with lengths of
cord around their necks on reaching the
main camp they crawled in barefoot and
kneeling towards the north presented
their statement of acquiescence together
with the records of their land
population and administrative and
military organization to the main
general end quote for all this he was
forgiven and vietnam was reduced to the
status of less than a kingdom and was
renamed by the chinese on none for the
muc dynasty between 1539 and 1600 there
were 40 major battles between the forces
backing the lay
and the Mach armies it was like a
Romance of the Three Kingdoms period but
with only two opposing forces by 1592
the mock glance under their direct
control that dwindled down to a small
area around the guanxi border with China
where he received nominal protection by
the 1670s the muck were no longer even
mentioned in the official histories what
ultimately happened to the Mak dynasty
probably they just moved to the China
side of the border in order to escape
the final blows from the Trin's who had
emerged from the Civil War period as the
most powerful military and political
force in the land by this time there was
already a civil war going on between the
trends in the north based in Hanoi and
then wins in the south based in way then
winds had made themselves at home in the
former Champa controlled lands the
chimes by now were either being
assimilated or pushed farther and
farther from their former homelands not
the first ethnic group who ever suffered
that fate and not the last either their
glorious past was now behind them the
lay emperor was still around but was
merely a symbol of the state and had no
authority he was a prisoner in a
Confucian world the Civil War period in
Vietnam was called the jin woon war
16:27 1673 it witnessed an explosion in
trade and commerce the whole Age of
Exploration had already happened by this
time in the new world that emerged from
this period had had an immediate impact
on the course of Vietnam history not to
mention up in China to the Jesuits had
already established their base in Macao
in all the great trading nations of
Europe we're trying to feel around the
edges out in those seas to determine the
best way to capitalize on all the
commodities and exotica of China and
Southeast Asia tea had already been
brought to Europe for the first time in
1610 and once royalty gave that the
thumbs up no one could ever get enough
of it tea became
a magnet like spices that drew explorers
and merchants to this far eastern part
of the world
this period also saw the first Catholic
missionaries poking their nose around
Vietnam looking for their first converts
in the middle of this upheaval between
the opposing forces of the dryn and when
in 1644 there was a little dynasty
change up in China the Ming fell and now
the manchu ching ruled over china by
this time the south of vietnam had
overtaken the northern Red River Delta
region as the commercial center of the
country by the 1600s Westerners were
already not an uncommon sight down there
the dryn Lords controlled the north part
of Vietnam as well as the person of the
lay Emperor as with salt saw during the
Eastern Han it was useful to have the
Emperor under their direct control to
prop up their legitimacy and in the
southern part of the country including
all the former Champa lands the win
Lords ruled them wins had tried to cut a
separate deal with China to try and get
recognition as an independent vassal
kingdom unrelated to the dryn controlled
North they didn't get it the Ching Court
and its infinite wisdom wouldn't
recognize them as an independent kingdom
vassal or otherwise their support for
the moment was still with the Trin's
and their puppet the lay Emperor for a
while at least than when Lords decided
it was in their best interest to just
continue on as a de facto independent
kingdom china recognition or no china
recognition and in 1750 then when ruler
didn't feel like waiting anymore and
declared himself an emperor a rival to
the dryn controlled lay emperor in the
north here is where vietnam first gets a
taste of what it's like being two
different countries in one there was
already a pretty distinct difference
between the cultures of the
north-central part and south of vietnam
took a lot of time to
meld everything into one national
identity that's another reason why it's
it's too premature to talk about a
Vietnam political entity or United
Vietnamese culture but we say Vietnam
just for convenience sake you know what
I mean
seventeen 70s and 80s this state of
affairs had degraded to a period of
three ways civil war in Vietnam the dryn
clan in the north with the lay emperor
in their corner them wins in the south
and now a new and dangerous rebel force
that they some rebels in the central
part of the land surely you remember
that day son rebellion 1771 1802 from
that past episode on the Chinese pirate
queen
Johnny salt that was episode CHP 174
that they son rebels were known to
recruit fighters from amongst these
South China Sea pirates and other
Chinese secret societies while the gin
and winds contended for supremacy there
were three brothers from the village of
de Sun who started an uprising against
the oppressive and win Lords down there
not to confuse you or anything but there
were three brothers all surname win and
when Vania the eldest and when van way
and when van loo when van way is the
name of my father-in-law but he wasn't
born into the late 1920s the story was
sort of reminiscent of the dot says
young uprising at the end of the chin
playing the Chung Chung role was the
oldest brother when Vania who ran afoul
of the law and finding himself in
impossible circumstances he headed for
the hills whipped up popular discontent
against the rule of them winds and set
himself up as a rebel leader he forced
land reform wherever he went which was
always a good way to get the peasants on
your side
he also allied himself with the Hill
tribesmen and charms living on the edge
the focus of this growing day Sun
rebellion shifted toward the win rulers
of the south and central part of Vietnam
a son rebels by 1773 were able to carve
out their own slice of Vietnam in the
central part the dryn clan was still
lording over things in the north and
they saw that a son as a threat just as
much as them wins
so they invaded from the north trance
nuff out this uprising throughout the
1770s and into the 1780s Vietnam was
locked in a threeway civil war with
alliances that shifted with the
circumstances the dryn in 1775 had even
allied themselves with the day son and
went after the Nguyen Lord's sacking
their capital and pushing them win clan
all the way south to their fortified
stronghold of Saigon not called by that
name yet and they were neutralized for
the time being then the taste son armies
did eventually attack Saigon and in the
aftermath of their victory Annie and all
Han Chinese found down there were killed
this was in 1776 and this massacre of
Chinese civilians who had been on the
side of the taesung was going to turn
their sympathies from the rebels to them
wins and this becomes important later on
in 1778 the oldest tastes own brother
wen van yack broke his alliance with the
dryn and declared himself an emperor
this is where the taesung dynasty comes
in then wins we're already finished off
in the south once that was done the Tay
Sun armies took their fight to the north
and in 1786 after 200 years ruling in
the north of Vietnam the dryn clan fell
to the forces of the Tay Sun and the
following year 1787 that's it for the
later laid eyeness tea or was it the
defeated lai dynasty emperor the last
one he ran to the Ching chin long
emperor in Beijing at 1788 and enlisted
his support to put his dynasty back on
the throne in Vietnam the Qianlong
Emperor ordered a Ching army of 200,000
troops to march south and restore this
Lai Emperor
and in October they went right in like
they did in dynasty's past and in 1788
they defeated that a son and captured
their capital at Tang long or Hanoi and
once again
the late honesty was back in business if
you could remember from a billion
episodes ago Emperor Qianlong had been
sending his armies out in all directions
and his attempts to pacify all these
neighbors in present-day Xin Jiang Tibet
Myanmar Taiwan and down in the south to
against dive yet in 1788 1789 this
invasion of dive yet to restore the lei
was only a part of the qin long emperors
ambitious ten great campaigns the
suretrend will go they ran from about
the mid 1750s to the early 1790s and let
me just say they didn't all end that
great it certainly didn't go as expected
for the ching military in the case of
dive yet as soon as they captured tong
loam and kicked the tastes own out
someone raised a bat signal or something
to win van way down in way he was the
middle tastes own brother and the most
skilled on the battlefield that a son
rebellion being a dyed-in-the-wool
populist uprising always enjoyed the
support of the masses and the people who
lived away from the coast and the plane
when van wey rallied his large army and
led his de son army north to take on the
chinese army and anyone who thought that
that Offensive of 1968 was such a novel
and new idea I think they got the idea
from when van Wei who a hundred and
seventy nine years earlier launched a
surprise attack on the Chinese during
that that Lunar New Year holiday and in
a stunning upset the smaller day son
army defeated the whole Ching army and
killed most of their top brass in the
fighting this was the Battle of na koi
don't got I know it probably doesn't
ring a bell with too many of you I can
assure you everyone who went through the
public school system and the Socialist
Republic of Vietnam No
of this battle it's right up there with
the greatest of Viet Nam's
patriotic victories with China out of
the picture once and for all I might add
the Daesung put an end to the lady nasty
founded by lay low and 1428 and also for
his achievement against the Chinese and
his victory at the Battle of na koi
danke
this middle taesung brother when van way
my father-in-law's namesake
he's also revered in the country as a
national hero this clash an early 1789
between the taesung forces and the Ching
army would be the last time China and
Vietnam faced off on land on opposite
sides until the 1979 border war that
will hopefully get to next episode
Vietnam was now essentially unified for
the first time since the fall of the mok
dynasty of the 1530s 1500 to 1800 mid
Ming to mid Ching and China that was a
period in Vietnam where central powers
sort of shifted back and forth among
various contending parties this was
particularly so during the hundred years
from 1570 to 1670 the trend when civil
war itself lasted from 1627 to 1670 to
after the teh sun vanquished and when
lords in the south you recall there was
a reign of terror that followed the
royal court was done away with again
reminiscent of the final days of the
northern song queens owned the whole
chow royal family were carted off to
China's version of northern Siberia but
you remember one of Wade's own sons a
ninth one he slipped through the fingers
of the Jurchens and managed to get away
and this Prince named Chuck Oh surely
remember he was able to escape organize
a new government and reconstitute the
Song Dynasty in and around present-day
Hangzhou home of Alibaba this was the
southern song emperor gaozong this
vietnam version of gaozong was named
when folk
and did any of you ever wonder how in
the heck did the French insinuate their
way inside Viet Nam's perfect little
world how did that whole Indochine thing
begin right here he was a royal who
escaped from the reign of terror being
meted out by the day son against his
clan now as riveting as this history is
the French in Vietnam I'm going to fly
as high up as felix baumgartner again
and just dish up the big picture hey as
it relates only to our story if I start
wandering off on any of my patented
tangents this may go on for months as
the title suggests let's try and stick
to the China Vietnam relations part of
the story you see once the foreigners
started coming that changed a lot of the
dynamic in Vietnam with respect to the
government no I guess you could say the
same about China because of the hye-jin
remember that a founding Ming home Wu
Emperor's ban on trade his extreme way
to deal with the curse of Japanese
pirates who operated with impunity along
the southeast China coast that ban on
coastal trade lasted thirteen seventy
one two 1567 now putting an end to that
was one of the first things the long
Qing Emperor did as soon as his father
the cha-ching Emperor breathed his last
this ban on all foreign trade got lifted
but Japan was still cut out of the deal
no Japan trade allowed in China traders
and merchants while there a funny lot
sometimes their patriotism tends to vary
indirectly to the magnitude of potential
profits at stake so the Japan trade
although banned in China shifted down to
Vietnam for the south-central part and
what was already a thriving trading
center for more than a thousand years
you got a whole lot better wherever
there was a good potential market the
Portuguese were usually the first to
find it and wherever they went the Dutch
Spanish English and French were sure to
follow so by the 17th century Vietnam
trade was booming and the south was
particularly bustling
much different culture down in the south
south of Quay the Chams had been
conquered but their culture remained and
whatever fit well with those who had
migrated to those lands it became part
of a new ever emerging southern vehicle
chur whereas the north of vietnam
embraced confucius in the south they
said you could keep your cone so what
they mainly wanted from China was
Buddhism but Catholicism also had taken
hold it first came to Vietnam in 1615
that was the date of the first mission
the story so many of us are familiar
with in China history the Jesuits
Ruggieri Ricci solve on Bell they're
beasts with no pleco chinesepod
differences nothing they had to figure
out the Chinese language
sink or swim the locals weren't going to
learn Latin in order to be converted
once they nailed the language there was
no stopping them well Kangxi Emperor he
stopped them but only for a while you
could almost use the same script in
China for Vietnam not the exact same
script but how the establishment of
Catholicism and Vietnam was rolled out
what followed in its wake it wasn't the
same story as in China but the two
history certainly rhymed right down to
all the martyrs who were regularly cut
down in the service of the faith Pierre
Joseph George pin yo better known as
Pierre Pagnotta bien he was the French
Catholic missionary who gave refuge to
the young wind foot on when he was on
the run from the Tay Sun army when they
were trying to wipe out all Han Chinese
in the south this is a long and
interesting story fille concatenation of
events that happened after Pierre pinata
bien tied his fate in 1777 to that of
win foot on or when on as he's also
known the story of indochine starts here
let me just skip to the punchline this
former
of being win lords who ruled in the
south of Vietnam when on he with little
help from his friends
the French defeated the taesung put an
end to their dynasty in 802 and paved
the way from when on to become the
founding emperor of a new dive yet
Kingdom perhaps you've heard of when
Anne's regnal name
he's more recognizable in the history
books as Emperor yalom and this win
dynasty that he founds it ends up being
Viet Nam's version of the ching that is
was the final one in vietnam history and
the one who had to bear the brunt of
European imperialism one thing you could
say of them win dynasty the court
officials took to the Chinese way of
doing things this dynasty built their
whole government infrastructure on the
Chinese model vietnamese was dropped as
the language at court and chinese was
brought back the ching legal code was
adopted and the capital was moved to way
not a place connected to Viet Nam's more
traditional and ancient past in the Red
River Delta region but then when Lords
did rule around way and when on was
certainly one of them so the government
was a hybrid of both Chinese and
traditional local ways an early on a
message was sent by then wind court to
the ching cha ching emperor i always get
him mixed up with the Ming cha-ching
Emperor that requested China to not call
their country dai viet anymore the new
name they wished to be known as was non
via the same non yet name that child wah
had given these lands 2,000 years prior
but the officials in china who attended
to these kinds of matters on behalf of
the Emperor's government in 1804 for
their own good reasons insisted the
country instead be called Vietnam or
Yunnan now it wouldn't stay this way for
long however and besides the ching
government still referred to the places
on nam so remember that 1804 the
entity known as Vietnam enters the
history books the founding emperor of
the Nguyen dynasty yalom if anyone
should get the blame for letting all the
French in the back door it's him during
his reign it was a golden time for
French advisers and missionaries Western
colonialism had arrived more than 300
French made their way to the Nguyen
court in way for various consulting and
advisory roles in China they were just
starting to realize how dangerous the
British were to their way of life and
the worst hadn't even started yet has it
happened time and again throughout
Chinese history going back to the Xin
anytime there was some sort of
distraction in China Vietnam could
breathe a little easier this was one of
those times France had big plans for
Vietnam and with their foot in the door
having been instrumental in when Anne's
victory over the taesung they got the
government to let in a heck of a lot of
Catholic missionaries as I said the
experiences many missionaries went
through in Vietnam were similar to the
missionary history recorded in China
many got killed or tortured or worse
there was a strange faith in the eyes of
the locals the earliest years of
preaching Christianity are filled with
these stories and also of great
successes as well in the harvesting of
souls of the newly faithful to protect
the faith and the lives of these
missionaries armies were needed to make
sure they weren't molested by the locals
who meant them harm and this led to the
necessity of beefing up France's
military presence like with the British
East India Company who needed a military
force to protect their commerce Frances
fig leaf for bringing in their own
military assets involved protection for
those proselytizing the Catholic faith
don't forget while all this is going on
down in Vietnam 1850s 1860s China was
reeling from military defeats and
unequal treaties with a wacky world of
Western imperialism was now going at a
full boil up there so give
the dynamic of what was happening at
Southeast Asia at this time France was
very determined to create their own
little perfect colonial world down in
Vietnam the souls that could be saved
the fortunes that could be earned and
the projection of French power in a
place that mattered the faction in
France that won out in the end
they felt it was worth risking the
nation's blood and treasure out in
Vietnam let's close out this episode
with a little overview on how France was
able to parlay their support them win on
back in 1802 into a whole big colonial
enterprise that lasted until 1954 and as
part of that whole big thing we'll also
take another look at the sino-french war
and we looked at that in previous
episodes doesn't hurt to rehash that I
guess you could say trouble started
brewing over the size of the payoff the
French were expecting and returned for
lending their muscle to place the yeah
long emperor when I'm on the throne it
has been a long and bitter political
fight back in Paris as far as the size
of the French commitment in Vietnam if
there was no return on this investment
then what the heck was the reason to
take all those risk to back this royal
this was a pure case of the old Chinese
saying tome Wong Imam same bed different
dreams this Emperor yalom he had no
intention whatsoever of handing over the
keys to the kingdom or allowing the
French to have the kind of free hand
they were expecting and keeping in tune
with the times all over Asia the French
decided to take instead what wasn't
being offered how to do that well 1858
were often running the Cochin China
campaign a martyred French missionary
conveniently served as France's Gulf of
Tonkin incident to light the fuse for
this won the battle drum sounded Spain
joined in the fray they were not too far
away over in the Philippines and no they
were pretty Catholic too you could say
so this expedition to punish Vietnam was
their fight to 1858
forces attacked and took down hang the
following year in early 1859 they were
successful in capturing Saigon and a few
other provinces there they quickly
consolidated their presence and hold
over the government this southern
portion of Vietnam became their base and
Saigon the capital on April 13th 1862
through a combination of aggression and
diplomacy the Vietnam government had to
cede three provinces to China and this
became known as cochin-china
col xiang xin perhaps many of you have
heard that term before or seen it on old
maps of vietnam over the next several
years the French land grab in Vietnam
continued in a familiar manner from
Saigon in there cochon Xin stronghold
they began their bloody push to the
north I'm was to the north of ko Shan
Shan cochin-china
and north of that was Tonkin the
traditional ancient and most saina sized
part of Vietnam and the French didn't
have their colonial I just on Vietnam
they had much bigger plans in Southeast
Asia
once the Second Opium War ended in 1860
the traders from all the great nations
who did business in China and Southeast
Asia gorged on a feast of Imperial
proportions
what France was doing down in Vietnam
was happening in spades up in China with
the other Western powers while France
was trying to enlarge their footprint in
Vietnam there was an incredible amount
of local push back in their corner to
counter French aggression the Vietnam
government was assisted by both China
and the Black Flag army led by Leo young
fool Leo was from that general area born
to the guanxi Vietnam border he had
gained a lot of street cred for the
success of his mercenary Black Flag army
of X typing heavenly kingdom rebels and
how they put away their opponents yo
young foo allied himself with the viet
s-- and was given an official military
rank
and he began to make his name as a
formidable foe to the French army
wherever they faced off the Black Flag
army had established a base along the
south bank of the Red River at a town
west of Hanoi called Sun pay they're the
au-yeung food
dug in it became a permanent fixture in
this sliver of Tonkin dongqn the
northern part of Vietnam the region we
focused on since part one of this series
young foo and his army well they stopped
French explorer Francis Garnier who in
his bid to carve out an alternative
route from Vietnam into Yunnan province
instead tried to take Tonkin in 1873 he
took a string of citadels along the Red
River but in the end he was killed by
the Black Flag troops a Treaty of Peace
and alliance was signed in Saigon on
March 15 1874 now among other things it
allowed France to trade promote
Christianity and enjoy sovereignty over
this southern cochin-china area only
so this well this calm the waters but
not for long the Ching Imperial
government in Beijing did not like what
they saw going down there that honker
Emperor that is to say his mother says
she tae ho and her coterie still
regarded Vietnam as a tributary state
and with France doing what they were
doing trying to make themselves at home
and Tonkin like they were well that made
the Ching look bad so there was a lot of
discussion about trying to reassert
China's traditional status over Vietnam
and that meant the French had to go or
at least tone down their activities
several years later in April 1882 onry
Riviere made another go at getting a
permanent french settlement established
in Tonkin and this 14 year long effort
like garnier years before saw Briere
perish early on in the line of duty at
the hands of the Black Flag Army in his
attempt to take Hanoi after these two
significant defeats of Garnier and
Riviere
France decided to get serious then for
the rest of 1883 the tide turned and now
France was winning one encounter after
another and inflicting some serious pain
on the Chinese and Black Flag armies
even pushing them out of their Sunday
base with Hana I threatened and the
Chinese and Black Flag armies both
licking their wounds France and China
decided to go to the negotiating table
China's chief foreign diplomat in those
days was of course the home jiong he sat
down with France's representative in
Tianjin Francois Ernest Fournier and
they tried to hammer out a deal down in
Tonkin now this Lee Fournier Accord or
convention of May 11th 1884 this
document was meant to put out this brush
fire going down and Tonkin between China
who together with the Black Flag army
was backing the Wynn dynasty and France
who were what they were in it for
themselves li hung-chang promised he'd
pull all Chinese troops out of Tonkin
but he didn't say when there were a
multitude of trade and commercial
related issues they also got worked out
in disputes related to the demarcation
of the China Tonkin border were also
settled this Lee Fournier Convention was
supposed to calm things down and Tonkin
between China and France the French
thought the Chinese troops would bolt as
soon as the ink was dry and the
agreement but they lingered and fighting
still continued mind you there was a lot
more than this happening in Vietnam I'm
will be presenting what was happening
relative to the subject of Vietnam and
China France China the Black Flag army
of Leo young fool they kept on fighting
but France was proving to be quite
formidable and by the summer of 1884 the
two Chinese armies the guanxi and Yunnan
armies were in tatters France saw China
back on her heels and found the perfect
time to go in for the kill but on June
23rd 1884 the diminished Chinese army
caught up with a French military force
at a place called buck Lai
the event was recorded in the history
books as the ambush at buck lay it went
pretty bad for the French and due to the
nature of the attack and the
circumstances that were spun out of
control by the wing in Paris hot to
carve out their empire this incident
became the casus belli for the
sino-french war of august 1884 to April
1885 and coming so soon practically on
the heels of the leaf Fournier agreement
that didn't last long
fighting between French and Chinese
forces and Tonkin this northernmost
portion of Vietnam the traditional
heartland it was surprisingly evenly
matched but the French still had the
edge where China was defeated in the
sino-french war was on the sea the way
ching dynasty politics operated at the
time it was next to impossible to get
the country to act as one to counter
this threat from france whatever assets
china had in the south had to face the
french on their own no help was coming
from the north of China and certainly
not from any vessels of the bay young
Navy when the French Navy sailed up the
China coast and blew up the Chinese
naval dockyard and Foucault and set up a
blockade around the Yangtze China was
forced to cave into France this all led
to the Treaty of Tianjin June 9th 1885
one of the most unequal of the unequal
treaties as far as France's take away
from that gimme their Protectorate
overrun nom became a reality China had
to back off and stop complaining about
the French and crouching on their turf
no more tributary state down in Vietnam
that belong to France now and so China
in the 1880s and all the way practically
until the early 1950s gets caught up in
all their own history we've gone through
all that in past episodes
China had a lot more on their plate than
Vietnam to deal with so when we
reconvene next episode will enter the
20th century and see how everything
shakes out with respect to China Vietnam
relations especially when the Vietnam
Communists arrive on the scene
that's obviously the glue that's going
to bind China and Vietnam later on you
sure won't want to miss that we're gonna
try and stick as close to the script as
possible I'm not gonna cover the first
Indochina war 1946 to 1954 or the
Vietnam War or second Indochina war is
it's also called 1955 to 1975 I'm only
going to talk about China's involvement
and all that then we'll finish off with
the general state of affairs since the
1970s 80s and into the present I'm
pretty sure we can do all that and part
six
so please do come back for that you look
at a try something healthy and
refreshing I'm back with my manatee
sense calm for a third time this time
bringing you the best of quiso province
no kidding
first flush gorgeous mate on Choi a
green tea any ka mate on emerald tip t
buds first flush a bee I kid you not
just picked around the recent Ching Ming
holiday go to tea sense calm te a Sen
z.com and search for CHP make sure you
brew this tea in a clear glass tea cup
so you can see those beautiful buds all
stand up straight at the bottom
what a sight to see Guido my friend the
province that's going places
the original tea garden going back to
the beginning of time pass through grey
Cho so they know a thing or two about
how to produce the ultimate green tea
tea sense.com search for CHP you're in
I'll have a link to that on my website
too and my facebook page and if I could
remember I'll put it out on Twitter I'm
betting even Lou Herrin at the ultimate
tea lexicon babble carp org even Lou
won't turn his nose up at it mate entre
yachty mate on County where grey Joe's
second city is located historic John you
make that call go to tea sands calm add
some good health to your good life okay
and a perfectly warm Sunday my birthday
today
in the City of Angels this is your host
and narrator Laszlo Montgomery signing
off and not even asking you I'm begging
you go check out some of the other shows
on the recorded history podcast network
would ya the history of literature the
useless information podcast Sunday
school dropouts the age of Napoleon the
second decade 1810 1820 podcast history
in the making
election college and of course our dan
our Mike the history of World War two
podcast Ray Harris jr. and me too what
sold a whole month to let me in the back
door that China history podcast I'm one
of the top Asian history shows on the
whole recorded history podcast network
so go check that out
take care everyone we'll see you again
next time
you